Quarkus Mutual TLS Implementation Blog Post (#507)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2020-04-17-quarkus-mutual-tls.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: 'Quarkus - Makes Mutual TLS Easy.'

Reviewer: The blog will; be on the Quarkus blog so let's remove Quarkus from the title.

> date:   2020-04-17 00:00 +0100

Reviewer: let's plan on releasing it this Thursday 2020-04-23

> author: mkouba

Reviewer: mmascia

> synopsis: Quarkus - Mutual TLS Authentication.

Reviewer: same here, The synopsis is a small sentence in the blog list https://quarkus.io/blog/ before the read more button. Maybe something more actionable e.g. Let's learn how to enable mutual TLS in a Quarkus app.

---

> 

Reviewer: In this entry, we will explore how to manually set mutual TLS encryption between two Quarkus applications.
Both on bare metal and on Kubernetes.

== What is Mutual TLS Authentication?

> Mutual TLS authentication or two way authentication is an extension of Transport layer security (or “TLS”), and it ensures that traffic between the client and server is secure and trusted in both directions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mutual TLS authentication or two way authentication is an extension of Transport Layer Security (or “TLS”), and it ensures that traffic between the client and server is secure and trusted in both directions.
```

== Why Mutual TLS?

> It is an additional security layer which verifies the identity of the client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is an additional security layer which verifies not only the server identity but also the client one.
In increases security and trust on both ends.
```

== How implement it?

> The best approach to implement Mutual TLS between two services has to come from the infrastructure, for instance, Service Mesh, to achieve a standard and secure way of communication and to avoid that each application implements their own solution. However, you are not always working on cutting edge environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best approach to implement Mutual TLS between two services is to delegate it to the infrastructure, for instance, a Service Mesh. This achieves a standard and secure way of communication and avoids that each application implements their own solution.
However, you are not always working on cutting edge environment.
```

> Let's have a look at how to implement mTLS with Quarkus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's have a look at how to implement mTLS with Quarkus if you don't have a service mesh environment like Istio.
```

> == Bootstrapping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Bootstrapping
```

> Bootstrapping Hello server application,

Reviewer: Let's create both the server and client applications we will secure.

[source]
----

> mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:1.4.0.CR1:create \

Reviewer: let's make sure it works on final versions of Quarkus.
Either we wait for 1.4 to be out, or we change it to 1.3.2.Final

Author: Agree to wait for 1.4 when is out?
To rollback 1.3.2.Final I need to revert the InjectMock test.

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to got for 1.4 since the blog can then show some of the new stuff as well

    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=quarkus-server-mtls \
    -DclassName="org.acme.server.mtls.GreetingResource" \
    -Dpath="/hello" \
    -DplatformArtifactId=quarkus-bom \

>     -DplatformVersion=1.4.0.CR1

Reviewer: DplatformVersion won't be needed if you use a Final version

Author: Correct

----

and Hello client application:

[source]
----

> mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:1.4.0.CR1:create \

Reviewer: Same remarks here

    -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
    -DprojectArtifactId=quarkus-client-mtls \
    -DclassName="org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingResource" \
    -Dextensions="rest-client, resteasy-jsonb" \
    -Dpath="/hello" \
    -DplatformArtifactId=quarkus-bom \
    -DplatformVersion=1.4.0.CR1
----

== Certificate and Truststore generation.

Of course, you need a server, client certificates and a truststore :)

[source]
----
keytool -genkeypair -storepass password -keyalg RSA -keysize 2048 -dname "CN=server" -alias server -ext "SAN:c=DNS:localhost,IP:127.0.0.1" -keystore quarkus-server-mtls/src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/server.keystore

keytool -genkeypair -storepass password -keyalg RSA -keysize 2048 -dname "CN=client" -alias client -ext "SAN:c=DNS:localhost,IP:127.0.0.1" -keystore quarkus-client-mtls/src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/client.keystore
----

> NOTE: For this example, the `client.keystore` used as _truststore_ for the server application and in the same way the `server.keystore` for the client application.

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence. What does this mean?

Author: Is this better?

```
For this example, we are simulating a truststore using:

* `client.keystore` as truststore for the server application.
* `server.keystore` as truststore for the client application.
```

> [source]

Reviewer: it would be good to explain why you are doing that

Author: To use the certificates as truststore, I wanted to make it simple without explaining additional steps, certificate authority extract the certificate, etc etc

----
cp quarkus-server-mtls/src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/server.keystore quarkus-client-mtls/src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/client.truststore

cp quarkus-client-mtls/src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/client.keystore quarkus-server-mtls/src/main/resources/META-INF/resources/server.truststore
----

== Hello Server Application.

[source]
----
code quarkus-server-mtls/
----

> === Enable SSL On the Hello Server Application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Enable SSL on the Hello Server Application.
```

Add the following properties to enable SSL in your application `src/main/resources/application.properties`

.application.properties
[source]
----
quarkus.ssl.native=true

quarkus.http.ssl-port=8443
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-file=META-INF/resources/server.keystore
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-password=password

quarkus.http.port=0
quarkus.http.test-port=0 
----

NOTE: See the guide https://quarkus.io/guides/native-and-ssl[Using SSL with Native] to explore in details how SSL works in Quarkus.

=== Activate client authentication.

.application.properties
[source]
----
quarkus.http.ssl.client-auth=required
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.trust-store-file=META-INF/resources/server.truststore
quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.trust-store-password=password
----

=== Update GreetingResource

> To understand if the response is coming from the server application, you will update the `org.acme.server.mtls.GreetingResource` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To better see that the response is coming from the server application, let's update the `org.acme.server.mtls.GreetingResource` class.
```

.org.acme.server.mtls.GreetingResource
[source,java]
----
@Path("/hello")
public class GreetingResource {

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String hello() {
        return "hello from server"; // <1>
    }
}
----
<1> Change the return statement in _"hello from server"_

And the test class.

.org.acme.server.mtls.GreetingResourceTest
[source,java]
----
@QuarkusTest
public class GreetingResourceTest {

    @Test
    public void testHelloEndpoint() {
        given()
          .when().get("/hello")
          .then()
             .statusCode(200)
             .body(is("hello from server")); <1>
    }

}
----
<1> Change the matcher in _"hello from server"_

=== Run it.

[source]
----
mvn quarkus:dev
----

If everything is correct when you try to hit the _/hello_ endpoint, you should expect the following error.

[source]
----
curl -k https://localhost:8443
curl: (35) error:1401E412:SSL routines:CONNECT_CR_FINISHED:sslv3 alert bad certificate

> ----

Reviewer: This means that your client (`curl`) did not provide a trusted certificate when it connected to the server.

== Hello Client Application.

At this point, the server application is ready to accomplish Mutual TLS. Let's configure the client.

[source]
----

> code quarkus-client-mtls/

Reviewer: I don't think this brings value and it iwll only work for vscode. Just say that you open the client app code in `quarkus-client-mtls`

    @Test
    public void testHelloEndpoint() {
        Mockito.when(greetingService.hello()).thenReturn("hello from server"); // <3>

        given()
          .when().get("/hello")
          .then()
             .statusCode(200)
             .body(is("hello from server"));
    }

}
----
<1> Inject the CDI bean.
<2> RestClient type.
<3> Mock the hello request.

NOTE: See the guide https://quarkus.io/guides/getting-started-testing[Testing] to explore in details.

=== Configure MicroProfile rest client for Mutual TLS.

Add the following properties to enable SSL in your application `src/main/resources/application.properties`

.application.properties
[source]
----
org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/url=https://localhost:8443
org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/trustStore=classpath:/META-INF/resources/client.truststore
org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/trustStorePassword=password
org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/keyStore=classpath:/META-INF/resources/client.keystore
org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/keyStorePassword=password

quarkus.ssl.native=true
----

=== Run it.

[source]
----
mvn quarkus:dev
----

> Now let's hit the client _/hello_ endpoint, and you should expect the following.

Reviewer: this is the hello endpoint from the client which in turns will call the server endpoint.

(PS maybe have different names would help)

Author: Ok /hello-server? :)

Reviewer: hello-server on the server side and hello-client on the client side. My reading is you exercise the client through a curl, correct?

Author: Yes, user -> /hello-client -> /hello-server

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3610725/80111424-ca4f0480-8577-11ea-8986-e12c986ba2a1.png)

Author: I updated the post with the new endpoints.

Reviewer: @eye0fra one last request, can you add that image in `https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io/tree/develop/assets/images/posts`/mutual-tls and link it to the blog post `image::/...[]` This graphical representation will help a lot!

Author: Awesome, where do you think is the best place to put the image in the blog? 
How Implement it section? after the sentence Let's have a look ...

Author: I put the image, I hope looks good because I cannot verify in my local

[source]
----
curl http://localhost:8080/hello
hello from server
----

== External Configuration

You do not want to have a certificate inside your application and Quarkus allows you to use external configuration and override the runtime application properties.
Using the external `config` directory under the current working directory, for instance `config/application.properties`

Let's check how we can do in Kubernetes / OpenShift.

[NOTE]
====
Working directory:

> * `redhat-openjdk-18/openjdk18-openshift` image is `/deployments`

Reviewer: I don't understand this

Author: The JVM and native image have two different working directory.
 - jvm has the working directory under /deployments/
 - native under /home/quarkus
To be able to do properties override we need to mount the configMap on <working-directory>/config
We can show only one case if it is confusing.

Reviewer: I still don't get it, sorry :/ I'd say this section needs some serious context explanation.
As a new reader, I have no idea why you have those two things nor what they represent really.

@geoand is there something we should improve on Quarkus?

Reviewer 2: I see what @eye0fra is saying here. The point is that the two container images use different paths, therefore you need to use different values for the properties in order to "target" the appropriate keystore.

I am thinking that perhaps we can generate a ConfigMap automatically for the user containing this information (or maybe add it as env vars to the `Deployment` / `DeploymentConfig`) when TLS is enabled.

We should definitely explore this to make it as easy as possible for users. @eye0fra can you please open an issue in Quarkus explaining this case (you can even link to this discussion for more context) so we can explore it?

Thanks

Author: This is more how the s2i quarkus image is designed: 
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-images/tree/master/modules/quarkus-native-s2i-scripts
And I think there is no way to override the QUARKUS_HOME variable with s2i at the moment.
I will open an issue on Quarkus to allow more flexibility.

Author: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/8820

----

=== ConfigMap

Create the server and client ConfigMap.

.server-ConfigMap.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: server
data:
  application.properties: |
    quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-file=/deployments/tls/server.keystore
    quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.key-store-password=password
    quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.trust-store-file=/deployments/tls/ca/truststore
    quarkus.http.ssl.certificate.trust-store-password=password
----

.client-ConfigMap.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: client
data:
  application.properties: |
    org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/url=https://server:8443
    org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/trustStore=/deployments/tls/ca/truststore
    org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/trustStorePassword=password
    org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/keyStore=/deployments/tls/client.keystore
    org.acme.client.mtls.GreetingService/mp-rest/keyStorePassword=password
----

=== Mount Everything

Mount everything in your Deployment Application. 
Here an example for the client application:

> [source,yaml]

Reviewer: @geoand do we have a better way to do this with the kube / openshift extensions? This is a lot of manual yaml to enter.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the Kubernetes extension is configurable in a way that allows you to specify custom mounts: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/6106870c0fb6e4b69a92e702f4615ba15c43576b/extensions/kubernetes/vanilla/deployment/src/main/java/io/quarkus/kubernetes/deployment/KubernetesConfig.java#L138

Furthermore, with the new `kubernetes-config` extension, you can now read ConfigMap contents **without** having to  mount them in the pod: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/6c124cfbfe8e596e2d1e1363f91a4b3342394360/docs/src/main/asciidoc/kubernetes-config.adoc

So ideally this section would be reworked to showcase that

Author: @geoand, @emmanuelbernard  you are right but sometimes you in a restricted environment which not allow the role to read/view ConfigMap / Secret to the service account. Any way I can adjust the quickstart to use the kubernetes-config, to show the capability

Author: Hi @geoand and @emmanuelbernard.
I added the kubernetes-config extensions scenario and as well more information around the manual mounting in case they do not have role permission. This should cover all the case.
And everything using the 1.4.0.Final release.
Let me know if you want to wait the 1.4.1.Final release.

Reviewer 2: `1.4.1.Final` is right around the corner and that is version we will be telling people to use, so I think it makes sense to wait.

Author: Everything is ready on 1.4.1.Final.
